--- english/4ea1-01-rms-20210604.pdf ---

--- Page 1 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mark Scheme  
 
 
 
June 2021  (Results) 
 
Pearson Edexcel International GCSE 
In English Language (4EA1) 
Paper 1: Non-fiction Texts and Transactional 
Writing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 2 ---
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Edexcel and BTEC Qualifications 
 
Edexcel and BTEC qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest 
awarding body. We provide a wide range of qualifications including academic, 
vocational, occupational and specific programmes for employers. For further 
information visit our qualifications we bsites at www.edexcel.com or 
www.btec.co.uk. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details on 
our contact us page at www.edexcel.com/contactus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pearson: helping people progress, everywhere 
 
Pearson aspires to be the world’s leading learning company. Our aim 
is to help everyone progress in their lives through education. We believe 
in every kind of learning, for all kinds of people, wherever they are in the 
world. We’ve been involved in education for over 150 years, and by working 
across 70 countries, in 100 languages, we have built an international 
reputation for our commitment to high standards and raising achievement 
through innovation in education. Find out more about how we can help you 
and your students at: www.pearson.com/uk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 3 ---
3 
 
 June 2021 
Publications Code 4EA1_01_2106_MS 
All the material in this publication is copyright  
© Pearson Education Ltd 2021 
General Marking Guidance 
 
 All candidates must receive the same treatment. Examiners must mark 
the first candidate in exactly the same way as they mark the last. 
 
 Mark schemes should be applied positively. Candidates must be 
rewarded for what they have shown they can do rather than 
penalised for omissions. 
 
 Examiners should mark according to the mark scheme not according 
to their perception of where the grade boundaries may lie. 
 
 There is no ceiling on achievement. All marks on the mark scheme 
should be used appropriately. 
 
 All the marks on the mark scheme are designed to be awarded. 
Examiners should always award full marks if deserved, i.e. if the 
answer matches the mark scheme. Examiners should also be prepared 
to award zero marks if the candidate’s response is not worthy of credit 
according to the mark scheme. 
 
 Where some judgement is required, mark schemes will provide the 
principles by which marks will be awarded and exemplification may be 
limited. 
 
 When examiners are in doubt regarding the application of the mark 
scheme to a candidate’s response, the team leader must be consulted. 
 
 
Specific Marking Guidance 
 
When deciding how to reward an answer, examiners should consult both the 
indicative content and the associated marking grid(s). When using a levels-based 
mark scheme, the ‘best fit’ approach should be used. 
    Examiners should first decide which descriptor most closely matches the 
     answer and place it in that level.  
  The mark awarded within the level will be decided based on the quality of 
the answer and will be modified according to how securely all bullet points 
are displayed at that level.  
  Indicative content is exactly that – they are factual points that candidates 
are likely to use to construct their answer.  
  It is possible for an answer to be constructed without mentioning some or 
all of these points, as long as they provide alternative responses to the 
indicative content t hat fulfils the requirements of the question. It is the 
examiner’s responsibility to apply their professional judgement to the 
candidate’s response in determining if the answer fulfils the requirements 
of the question.  
--- Page 4 ---
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AO1 Read and understand a variety of texts, selecting and interpreting 
information, ideas and perspectives. 
AO2 Understand and analyse how writers use linguistic and structural 
devices to achieve their effects. 
AO3 
 
Explore links and connections between writers’ ideas and 
perspectives, as well as how these are conveyed. 
AO4 Communicate effectively and imaginatively, adapting form, tone 
and register of writing for specific purposes and audiences. 
AO5 Write clearly, using a range of vocabulary and sentence structures, 
with appropriate paragraphing and accurate spelling, grammar and 
punctuation. 
--- Page 5 ---
5 
 
Section A: Reading 
 
Question 
Number 
AO1 Read and understand a variety of texts, selecting and 
interpreting information, ideas and perspectives. 
Mark 
1 Accept any of the following, up to a maximum of two 
marks: 
 ‘headlights’ (1) 
 ‘oncoming’ (1) 
 ‘monsters’ (1) 
 ‘grinds (up towards me)’ (1) 
 ‘(passes in a) clattering/roar’ (1) 
 
  (2) 
 
Question 
Number 
AO1 Read and understand a variety of texts, selecting and 
interpreting information, ideas and perspectives. 
Mark 
2 Accept any reasonable description of the writer’s ride down 
the mountainside, in own words, up to a maximum of four 
marks.  
 
For example: 
 
 it is night-time and very dark 
 the road is very high up 
 there are no lights on the bike 
 the writer is not wearing anything that will reflect light 
and show where he is 
 he is using the lights of the lorries to show the way 
 he is unable to see anything in front of him 
 there is another journalist cycling ahead of him 
 it is a very dangerous situation in which he could be 
hurt or even die 
 the writer knows that he should stop, but for some 
reason that he does not understand he feels compelled 
to carry on 
 the bike is travelling very fast 
 there is the smell of diesel in the air 
 the lorries are emitting a lot of smoke 
 
Reward all valid points. 
 
 
  (4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page 6 ---
6 
 
 
 
 
Question 
Number 
AO1 Read and understand a variety of texts, selecting and 
interpreting information, ideas and perspectives. 
Mark 
3 Accept any reasonable explanation of what the writer is 
thinking and feeling, up to a maximum of five marks.  
 
For example: 
 
 the writer feels that he is travelling very fast and 
possibly in danger: ‘I am hurtling down, down, down’ 
 he has some safety concerns and, although his clothing 
is not reflective, he is ‘wearing a helmet’  
 he recalls that he has not ‘encountered any traffic 
police’ apart from in Thimphu 
 he is ‘lost in the night’, suggesting not only that he does 
not know where he is, but perhaps also that he is 
feeling ‘lost’ in or overwhelmed by the moment 
 he is ‘genuinely worried’ that he may have gone the 
wrong way and ‘taken a wrong turning’  
 the writer is enjoying the darkness 
 despite knowing it is ‘irresponsible’, he is enjoying the 
difference between the uncertain situation he is in at 
this time and his normal life at home 
 he feels disconnected – ‘as if a string has snapped’ – 
from his existence in London 
 the situation is dangerous and he is ‘in real jeopardy’ 
but he feels ‘alive’ 
 the realisation hits him that the excitement of the 
moment is ‘why I love to travel’  
 
Reward all valid points. 
 
  (5) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page 7 ---
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Question 
Number 
Indicative content 
4 Reward responses that explain and analyse how the writer uses 
language and structure to interest the reader. 
 
Examiners should refer to the following bullet points and then to the 
table on page 8 to come to an overall judgement. 
 
Responses may include: 
 
 at the start of the text, the writer gives a vivid description of the 
mountainous landscape to help the reader to visualise it 
 the noun ‘mountains’ is repeated eight times in the first two 
paragraphs to emphasise how many there are and perhaps to 
indicate how impressed or overwhelmed the writer is by them 
 the analogy of ‘a giant child’ sculpting the landscape is used to 
engage the reader and further help them to imagine what it 
looks like 
 the powerful and precise verbs (some of which are alliterative), 
‘gathering’, ‘piling’, ‘pinching’, ‘knuckling’, ‘poking’, are used to 
show how the landscape looks crafted 
 in the second paragraph’s opening words – ‘It is my first night in 
Thimphu’ – use of the present tense gives a sense of immediacy 
and including the adjective ‘first’ shows how new this place is for 
the writer, leading the reader to feel as if they are experiencing it 
alongside her 
 the use of numbers in ‘ninety-minute drive from the airport’ and 
‘five different flights over four days’ helps to give a sense of how 
remote Thimphu is and perhaps how isolated the writer feels 
 the use of a list at the start of the third paragraph – ‘instant 
coffee, powdered milk, plasticky white bread and flavorless red 
jam’ – conveys how unappetising and disappointing the hotel 
breakfast is 
 the fact that the girls she meets are introduced as ‘two other 
Canadians’ implies that she will not be alone and may have 
things in common with them 
 the descriptions of her new companions suggest they are 
pleasant and friendly, especially Lorna’s ‘ringing laughter’ and 
Sasha’s ‘impish smile’ 
 the fact that Lorna and Sasha are ‘ecstatic’ about Bhutan having 
‘traveled extensively’ leads the reader to expect that the country 
has a lot to offer 
 the writer confesses that she ‘is hoping to pick up some of their 
enthusiasm’ leaving the reader to wonder if this will happen and 
assume that she is not feeling much excitement at the start of 
her stay 
--- Page 8 ---
8 
 
 the writer seems surprised at the size of Thimphu which ‘seems 
even smaller’ than she was led to believe: ‘doesn’t even have 
traffic lights’ and there is just ‘the occasional truck or landcruiser’ 
 the fact that the traffic police are making ‘incomprehensible’  
signals conveys how she is a foreigner and everything is different 
 the list of three – ‘lotus flowers, jewels and clouds’ – used to 
describe how the houses are decorated, makes them sound 
exotic and attractive 
 the long list of items sold by the shops illustrates how they all 
‘seem to be selling the same things’ which might strike the 
reader as unusual 
 the writer conveys her surprise to the reader at the fact that 
‘There are more signs of the outside world than I had expected’ 
and states that ‘they are startling against the Bhutanese-ness of 
everything else’ 
 to the writer, Thimphu ‘looks very old’ and she is very surprised 
to learn that it is ‘actually new’; the use of the antonyms ‘old’ 
and ‘new’ highlights the difference between her assumptions and 
the reality 
 the writer uses three Bhutanese words in the text, ‘dzong’, ‘gho’  
‘kira’; these are all in italics to make them stand out but, as she 
gives their meanings, they also serve to show how the writer is 
learning a new language and the reader learns alongside her 
 the writer offers a full description of what the Bhutanese people 
look like and how they dress: the adjectives ’handsome’,  
‘beautiful’, ‘aristocratic’ and ‘gentle’ demonstrate her admiration 
for their looks and the list of nouns ‘dignity, unselfconsciousness, 
good humor, grace’ show how positively she views their qualities 
 in the penultimate paragraph, the writer describes how her ‘first 
lessons, in Bhutanese history, are the most interesting’ and goes 
on to share what she has learned with the reader 
 in the final paragraph there is an amusing account of how, in the 
19th century, an Englishman, Ashley Eden, made a ‘disastrous 
visit’ to try to prevent the Bhutanese raiding British territory and 
was treated unceremoniously by them 
 the extract ends on an upbeat note with the writer expressing 
how she is ‘full of admiration for this small country’ and leaves 
the reader with a very positive impression. 
 
Reward all valid points. 
 
 
 
  
--- Page 9 ---
9 
 
Question 4 
Level  Mark  AO2 Understand and analyse how writers use linguistic and 
structural devices to achieve their effects. 
  0 No rewardable material.  
Level 1 1–2   Basic identification and little understanding of the language 
and/or structure used by writers to achieve effects. 
 The use of references is limited. 
Level 2  3–4  Some understanding of and comment on language and 
structure and how these are used by writers to achieve 
effects, including use of vocabulary. 
 The selection of references is valid, but not developed.  
Level 3  5–7  Clear understanding and explanation of la nguage and 
structure and  how these are used by writers to achieve 
effects, including use of vocabulary and sentence structure. 
 The selection of references is appropriate and relevant to the 
points being made.  
Level 4  8–10  Thorough understanding and expl oration of language and 
structure and how these are used  by writers  to achieve 
effects, including use of vocabulary, sentence structure and 
other language features. 
 The selection of references is detailed, appropriate and fully 
supports the points being made.  
Level 5 11–12  Perceptive understanding and analysis of language and 
structure and how these are used by writers to achieve 
effects, including use of vocabulary, sentence structure and 
other language features. 
 The selection of references is discriminating and clarifies the 
points being made. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
--- Page 10 ---
10 
 
Question 
Number 
Indicative content 
5 Reward responses that compare the writers’ experiences and the 
ways in which they present their ideas and perspectives. 
 
Examiners should refer to the following bullet points and then to 
the table on page 11 to come to an overall judgement. 
 
Responses may include: 
 
 both texts are a first-person account of an experience in 
Bhutan 
 both writers make reference to the mountains: Text Two 
begins with the phrase ‘Mountains all around’ and goes on to 
provide more detail; Text One more briefly says they ‘are the 
highest mountains in the world’  
 both writers use powerful verbs to try to convey a sense of the 
landscape of Bhutan: Text One describes how it is ‘puckered 
and folded and pressed and contorted’ and in Text Two she 
imagines ‘a giant child…piling up rock, pinching mud into 
ridges…knuckling out little valleys and gorges, poking holes for 
water to fall through’ 
 both writers use the present tense when describing their 
actions to give a sense of immediacy, and in Text One this also 
adds to the feeling of danger 
 both writers inform the readers of the old name of Bhutan 
‘Druk Yul’ and its meaning ‘Land of the Thunder Dragon’; in 
Text One the writer links this to the country’s mythology and 
also uses the term to describe the large trucks, whereas in 
Text Two the writer goes on to provide more of the ancient 
names for the country 
 both writers make mention of the people they are with: in Text 
One Ross refers to ‘Chris,  another – faster – journalist’ who 
had helped him up the mountain and Zeppa talks of Lorna and 
Sasha, ‘two other Canadians who have signed on to teach in 
Bhutan for two years’  
 both writers state how a king of Bhutan has made an important 
ruling showing his power and influence: in Text One Ross 
informs the reader that ‘in 1972, the then-king pronounced 
that economic progress had to be managed according to the 
country’s Buddhist principles’, and in Text Two Zeppa says how 
‘Before the sixties…the third king decided to make it [Thimphu] 
the capital’ 
 in both texts references to traffic control in Thimphu are made: 
in Text One Ross says the only traffic police he has seen was a 
‘man directing matters at a crossroads in central Thimphu’, and 
in Text Two, Zeppa describes in a little more detail how ‘Blue-
suited policemen stationed at two intersections along the main 
street direct the occasional truck or landcruiser using 
incomprehensible but graceful hand gestures’ 
 both writers include description of an important building: in 
Text One it is ‘Taktsang monastery – Bhutan’s best-known site’ 